There are many ways to achieve consensus and
different methods are used across different blockchains.
One very successful consensus algorithm is known as Proof of Stake.
In this video, we'll cover how proof of stake works,
potential challenges if faces,
and who's using it.
Proof of stake is a consensus algorithm that seeks
to achieve consensus by giving vote to those with stake.
Stake in this case means those who have
the most investment in a positive outcome for this system.
These users are considered the most likely to vote on making
a positive impact on or improvement of the system.
How does proof of stake work?
In the proof of stake consensus protocol,
there are no miners.
Instead, there are validators.
These validators do not need to invest in computing equipment to mine
the blocks that create coins because all the coins exist from the outset.
Instead, the purpose of these validators,
also known as stakeholders,
is to determine which block makes it onto the blockchain.
In order to validate transactions and create blocks,
validators put up their own coins as stake.
You can think of it as if they were placing a bet.
If they validate a fraudulent transaction,
they lose their holdings as well as their right to
participate as a validator in the future.
In theory, this check incentivizes the system to validate only truthful transactions.
In proof of stake,
the greater the fraction of the total the coins a validator owns,
the higher their chances of being picked to create
the next block because they have a higher stake.
A validator node with 400 coins will be four times
as likely to be chosen compared to a node that only has 100 coins.
If a validator's block is added.
The validator is awarded coin to proportional to the amount of their bet.
With that said this begs the question,
isn't it possible for a bad acting validator not to lose
anything by betting on multiple blocks so they always win out in the end?
Very good. You've stumbled across what's referred
to as the nothing at stake problem for proof of stake.
There's something about blockchains that we haven't mentioned before,
the possibility for that single chain to fork.
When a blockchain is extending under the proof of stake paradigm
it's possible a fork in the blockchain can occur either accidentally.
For example, if some nodes receive information to add
one block while others receive an update to add another block,
or because there is a malicious attempt to rewrite the history and reverse a transaction.
In other words, if there are multiple competing block options isn't it possible for
a bad acting validator to just place bets on every block so they always come out on top?
It's true. These are possibilities,
but proponents of proof of stake have strategies against these types of attacks.
One strategy is a Slasher solution.
Which entails penalizing validators if they simultaneously create blocks on multiple chains.
Alternatively, some protocols use
a strategy that punishes validators for creating blocks on the wrong chain.
In this method, validators must be selective and
conscious about which blockchain they put their stakes in.
Who uses proof of stake?
Ethereum is switching from proof of work,
to proof of stake in a project code-named casper.
Digital cash, or Dash is one of the pioneers of proof of stake algorithm.
It's built on the core Bitcoin platform,
but with added privacy and speedy transaction
features such as PrivateSend, and InstantSend.
There's also Lisk.
Designed to allow developers to create their own decentralized Apps.
Similar in function to Ethereum or NEO,
but allowing developers to use JavaScript.
Lisk uses a customized form of proof of stake called delegated proof of stake.
This just means that only the top 101 delegates are able to have stakes in the network,
and these delegates are voted on a rolling basis by the community.
One Lisk equals one vote.
Now, that wraps it up for proof of stake.
The next method of consensus we will cover is
Delegated Byzantine Fault Tolerance,DBFT for short.